Vaccines are Beneficial 
      For the majority of human history, humanity has been at the mercy of infectious diseases, 
with little that could be done to treat or prevent them, because it wasn’t understood what caused 
them.  Yet, we now have modern medicine and can much more effectively both treat and prevent 
most infectious diseases.  One of the most important tools in this fight is vaccines, which 
effectively train the body to recognize and fight off diseases prior to the person being exposed to 
the illness.  The invention of vaccines has saved countless lives over the past several decades; 
this is an empirically verifiable fact, as will be demonstrated later.  And yet, there has been and 
continues to be much controversy over both the safety and effectiveness of vaccines in recent 
years, with the recent Covid-19 vaccines being particularly controversial.  Nonetheless, in 
general, vaccines are very effective at preventing illness and they tend to pose minimal risks for 
those receiving them.  In fact, vaccines have been so effective at practically eliminating many 
diseases that society has forgotten what it was like before vaccines and so many people falsely 
believe they were never necessary to begin with.    
      Perhaps the most impressive vaccine breakthrough of the 20th century, and which 
demonstrates just how effective vaccines can be at eliminating infectious diseases in a 
population, is the eradication of smallpox, “an ancient disease…[with] mortality rates [that] can 
reach as high as 80%” (Pennington).  There were many smallpox epidemics throughout history 
and countless lives lost as a result.  For example, the following graph shows that “in London in 
the 18th century around 1 in every 13 deaths was caused by smallpox, the majority of which 
were young children” (Ochmann).



(ibid)
As the graph demonstrates, the proportion of deaths due to smallpox started vastly decreasing 
just before 1796, which corresponds to British surgeon Edward Jenner’s invention of “the 
smallpox vaccine, the world’s first vaccine against any disease” (Ochmann and Richie).  
However, it wasn’t until mass vaccination efforts in the 20th century that the disease was actually 
eradicated.  To be specific, “Between 1900 and 1949, prior to routine use of the smallpox 
vaccine in the U.S., there were approximately 29,000 cases of smallpox annually in the U.S. 
After the mass vaccination program, there were zero cases of wild smallpox in the United States
 (and the entire planet, too)” ( Naprawa).  As shown in the following graph, it was around 1980 
that the disease was all but gone thanks to this global vaccination effort:

(“Global Number of Reported Smallpox Cases.”)
      In spite of the vast success of vaccines, most notably in the aforementioned case of 
smallpox, vaccine hesitancy has been around for a long time.  One might think that the hesitancy 
prior to the success of the smallpox vaccine was different than the hesitancy today and in some 
ways it was, but in other ways it actually wasn’t all that different.  In terms of how it was 
different, for example, “some [people] decried [the first smallpox vaccine] as being opposed to 
God’s will” (Pennington).  This was also one reason some people resisted variolation – a 
precursor to vaccination – prior to the introduction of the smallpox vaccine.  The 18th century 
idea that variolation constituted an unnatural interference of a person’s relationship with God 
was one of  “the seeds of later anti-vaccination attitudes” (Haelle).  However, as time went by, 
vaccine resistance became less about religion and more about “a general mistrust of scientific 
institutions and government” (Goldberg, qtd. in Haelle).  So while some people fed opposition to 
the smallpox vaccine by claiming it was against God’s will, others “played on the public’s 
misunderstanding of the vaccine and fears of putting foreign substances into one’s body” 
(Pennington). According to Agnes Arnold-Forstor, “a medical historian at the University of 
Bristol in England, ‘Attempts to curb [such opposition] often failed because they relied on 
authoritarian and coercive methods’” (Haelle).  Even today, a lack of trust in healthcare 
authorities is linked to vaccine hesitancy, as the following graph demonstrates:
      (“Trust in Doctors and Nurses vs. Disagreement Vaccines Are Safe, 2018.”)
      Where mandating the smallpox vaccine caused some people to resist more strongly than 
before, showing the sheer effectiveness of it worked to convince people to get vaccinated 
(Pennington).  This isn’t unique to the smallpox vaccine, however, and it only works if people 
trust the source of the information about the effectiveness of vaccines.  For example, in 1947, 
after the death of “Eugene Le Bar, a merchant traveling from Mexico City to Maine with his 
wife”, from smallpox, 
[New York City Mayor William] O’Dwyer held a press conference in which he asked all 
[NYC] residents who had not been recently vaccinated to be vaccinated against the 
disease. In the next month, 80% of the city’s residents were vaccinated—some 6.35 
million people. In the end, the effort was judged a success: the total number of smallpox 
cases reached only 12, and the final death count was limited to two (“March 1, 1947: A 
Massive Vaccination Effort.”). 
This was effective in convincing residents to get vaccinated because they trusted the source of 
the information as well as because the harm of smallpox was well-known and self-evident at the 
time.  That is, it wasn’t only the sheer effectiveness of the vaccine and trusted information source 
that convinced people to get vaccinated, but also the common knowledge that smallpox was 
incredibly dangerous and all too widespread.  
      While the smallpox vaccine was able to actually eradicate the disease to the extent that 
the vaccine itself is rarely needed anymore, most infectious diseases aren’t so easy to eliminate 
entirely.  Instead, when most individuals in a population are vaccinated, most vaccines minimize 
the number of cases of the relevant disease(s) without getting rid of it/them altogether, hence 
providing herd immunity.  This means that, unlike with the smallpox vaccine, when other 
vaccines were introduced in the later portion of the 20th century, the general public didn’t see the 
sheer horror that such diseases could cause to the same extent that they did with smallpox and so 
the vaccines weren’t seen as being as important as they actually were.  This is even more of a 
concern today because diseases such as measles have been essentially sent “into remission” due 
to mass vaccination, but haven’t been eradicated.  Hence, people think such diseases are gone 
and so don’t see the necessity of vaccination, which threatens the population’s herd immunity 
against such diseases.
      Today’s concerns that vaccines aren’t actually necessary at all started with 20th century 
concerns about the safety of vaccines.  Some specific safety concerns people had about vaccines 
in the 20th century were the result of intentional deception about vaccines.  For example, there 
was a 1982 documentary called “DPT: Vaccine Roulette” which wrongly condemned the safety 
of the DPT (diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus) vaccine by “highlight[ing] stories of parents and 
doctors claiming that children developed seizures and permanent brain damage” (Pennington), 
even though the chance of having a seizure as a side effect was small and there was no evidence 
that the vaccine caused long-term harm (ibid).  Additionally, in 1998, “British gastroenterologist 
Andrew Wakefield published a report in the Lancet alleging that the measles-mumps-rubella, or 
MMR, vaccine caused autism spectrum disorder in 12 children” (Haelle).  Years later this study 
was debunked and Wakefield revealed as a fraud, as it turned out he had intentionally used false 
data (Seppa), and yet, to this day many people wrongly believe that vaccines in general cause 
autism.  This is despite the fact that Wakefield himself only claimed that one specific vaccine 
caused autism and even that claim has been long since been proven untrue.
      In addition to the still prevailing but erroneous claims that vaccines cause autism, in 
current times, many people mistakenly believe that vaccines never did anything helpful and that 
there’s a conspiracy to trick people into getting them just so pharmaceutical companies can make 
money.  However, since vaccines do, in fact, prevent diseases, companies could actually make 
far more money from selling treatments for vaccine-preventable illnesses by not producing 
vaccines then they make by selling them.  In fact, “vaccines produce around a 5% lower profit 
percentage than do other pharmaceuticals” (The Original Skeptical Raptor).  Hence, it’s only 
necessary to debunk the argument that vaccines are completely ineffective.  When those who 
claim vaccines aren’t the reason for the decline in illnesses such as smallpox and measles are 
confronted with data such as the aforementioned graphs showing the decline of smallpox, they 
say it wasn’t vaccines that caused the decline, but better hygiene practices.  For example, they 
might cite the following graph, pointing out that measles death rates were already declining prior 
to the introduction of a measles vaccine:
(Fallacy Man, “US Measles Death Rates.”)
The problem with this argument is that, while it’s true that measles deaths were declining prior to 
the introduction of vaccination and this is at least in part due to better hygiene practices, it’s 
entirely possible for there to be more than one reason for the declining death rates.  There’s 
nothing illogical or unreasonable about the claim that better hygiene practices decreased the 
deaths from many types of diseases and then, later on, vaccination caused an even greater 
decrease.  In fact, that’s exactly what happened.  The reason that’s not very clear from the above 
graph is because it’s zoomed out too much (Fallacy Man, “Yes, Vaccines did Save us from 
Disease: a Graphic Analysis”).  You can faintly see that there’s an additional decrease in the 
above graph where the arrow points, but it’s much clearer if we zoom in on the relevant time 
frame: 
(Fallacy Man, “US annual measles death rates before and after the introduction of the vaccine”) 
Both of these graphs are valid and use the same data, but the latter more clearly shows the 
additional decline in deaths correlated with the introduction of the measles vaccine and makes it 
evident that the decline is not merely continuing the earlier pattern.  
      Furthermore, while some people might argue that this is only a correlation and doesn’t 
demonstrate a causal relationship, the science of vaccination is well understood by biologists and 
vaccine effectiveness has been definitively demonstrated many times over:
For example, numerous experiments have confirmed that herd immunity does 
work, and [hence] having a large number of vaccinated people decreases the 
community wide disease rates by protecting the unvaccinated (Rudenko et al. 
1993; Hurwitz et al. 2000; Reichert et al. 2001; Ramsay et al. 2003). Similarly, 
multiple studies have documented that introducing vaccines into a population 
causes the disease and death rates to plummet (Clemens et al. 1988; Adgebola et 
al. 2005; Richardson et al. 2010). Other studies have clearly demonstrated that 
people who are vaccinated have lower disease rates than people who are not 
vaccinated (Schmitz et al. 2011). Finally, there have been numerous documented 
instances of disease outbreaks accompanying low vaccination rates (Antona et al. 
2013; Knol et al. 2013) (Fallacy Man, “Yes, vaccines did save us from disease: a 
graphic analysis”).
Additionally, in the U.S., every new vaccine is required to undergo rigorous scientific testing to 
demonstrate both safety and effectiveness.  According to the FDA [Food and Drug 
Administration] website, before a vaccine can be approved, the FDA must “evaluate the data 
[provided] to determine whether the safety and effectiveness of the vaccine has been 
demonstrated and whether the manufacturing and facility information assure product quality and 
consistency” (“Vaccine Development – 101”).  In other words, vaccine manufacturers must do 
their own studies demonstrating the safety and efficacy of the vaccine they want approved and 
the FDA will then evaluate their data and results before potentially granting approval.    
	Moving on, many of the current concerns people have about vaccines are in regards to the 
COVID-19 vaccines specifically.  One of the biggest concerns which bothered even those who 
aren’t normally vaccine hesitant is that the vaccines were developed much more quickly than 
normal.  This is a valid concern given that, normally, developing a new vaccine can take years or 
even decades, while “the first vaccines to combat COVID-19 were developed, tested and given 
emergency use authorization in 11 months” (Lance).  One of the reasons vaccine development 
usually takes so long is that traditionally, vaccines have been made of weakened or dead versions 
of the relevant virus or at least a portion of the virus, and “growing enough debilitated 
viruses…to make vaccine doses for millions of people can take months or even years” (Hesman 
Saey).  However, this wasn’t a problem with the COVID vaccines because they don’t use any 
part of the virus itself.  Instead, the vaccines are “made of mRNA wrapped in a coating that 
makes delivery easy and keeps the body from damaging it” (“How MRNA COVID-19 Vaccines 
Work”).  Essentially, rather than the body learning how to fight off the virus by being exposed to 
a weakened version of it, “The mRNA in the vaccine teaches your cells how to make copies of 
the spike protein” (ibid), a prominent feature of the virus and “if you are exposed to the real virus 
later, your body will recognize it and know how to fight it off” (ibid).  This type of vaccine is 
much faster to produce.  Specifically, while “a traditional vaccine takes two to three years to 
develop” one version of an mRNA covid vaccine “took [only] three hours to design and about a 
month to manufacture” (Hesman Saey).  
      However, scientific developments weren’t the only reason for the covid vaccines being 
developed so much more quickly than normal. There are main 5 stages of vaccine development 
which are normally done consecutively, that is, the first stage must be completed prior to starting 
the second stage, and so on.  The reason is that, if a problem were discovered in an earlier stage, 
all the work done and money spent on the later stages could end up being for nothing (“Are 
COVID Vaccines Really Safe?”).  Nonetheless, because of how widespread the pandemic has 
been and how desperately we needed a vaccine, governments all over the world poured far more 
money into developing covid vaccines than would normally be spent on vaccine development, 
which allowed researchers to do many of the development stages in parallel, hence saving (ibid) 
around 4 – 6 years (Lance).  
      Ultimately, the COVID vaccines are just as safe as any other vaccines, and yet many 
people refuse to get vaccinated, some because they’ve been tricked into believing lies about the 
vaccines and/or the pandemic and others because they selfishly put their own ideas of personal 
liberty ahead of both their own health and the lives and health of those around them. Considering 
the issue from either an act utilitarianist or rule utilitarianist perspective, the latter group is 
certainly behaving unethically because both the individual act of refusing to get vaccinated 
because they think such a refusal is an exercise of personal freedom, as well as people treating 
such a refusal as a rule, put countless other people at risk of catching a dangerous and potentially 
deadly disease.  From a utilitarian perspective, those refusing the vaccine because of erroneous 
beliefs about its safety, efficacy, or necessity are also behaving unethically, as utilitarianism 
considers only consequences, not intentions.  From a Kantian perspective, the latter group are 
behaving unethically because they’re treating other individuals as mere means – they aren’t 
respecting their autonomy and concerns as individuals and are completely disregarding the effect 
their refusal will have on other people, essentially treating them as a means to satisfy their own 
desire to exercise their freedom.  The former group, however, aren’t behaving unethically from a 
Kantian perspective because they aren’t willfully risking harm to other people and so cannot be 
said to be disregarding the humanity of others.  	
      In conclusion, from the beginning, there have been people hesitant to receive vaccines or 
even openly opposed to their use, sometimes for religious reasons, sometimes because of 
mistaken beliefs about their safety, effectiveness, or necessity due to a lack of truth in the 
government and/or healthcare authorities, and sometimes out of a selfish desire to rebel against 
what they perceive as a violation of their personal freedom.  Nevertheless, vaccines have saved 
countless lives from deadly diseases for hundreds of years and scientists are working on ways to 
speed up the development process, such as developing mRNA vaccines instead of more 
traditional vaccines via a weakened form of the relevant virus species.  



     

